Canonical Workflow Frameworks For Science

In automn 2020 GEDE started with a new activity called Canonical Workflow Frameworks for Science (CWFS). The reasons for this new CWFS activity can be 
briefly summarised by the following bullet points:
- Data practices in the research labs did not change significantly despite the awareness of FAIR and the verbal agreement on Open Science. If sharing 
is supported, it is still common practice to exchange data files without any contextual or provenance information.
- In the last few years, CNRI, DONA, RDA and GOFAIR worked hard on the concept of FAIR Digital Objects as a solution to overcome to the large 
inefficiencies and it seems that we have now a good understanding of where we are and what is missing. Various groups worked on software supporting 
FDOs such as the DOIP SDK and CORDRA reference software presented by CNRI experts and important services (Handle/PID, Data Type Registries) have been 
installed. However, researchers in the labs are not interested in protocol specifications, they are interested in software that helps them to get their 
research work done.
- Therefore, we need to take the researchers with us and offer solutions that on the one hand helps them in improving their work and on the other hand 
creates FDOs to overcome the inefficiencies and to take care that we are not ending up in a Digital Dark Age as V. Cerf called it. 
- Workflow Frameworks that are primarily influenced by the scientific workflows in the labs are seen as a way to combine the two goals. Some studies 
support the idea that there are common workflow patterns across disciplines and countries. Thus it makes sense to start working on these Canonical 
Workflow Frameworks for Science (CWFS). IT experts have worked on Technical Workflow Frameworks for years letting us assume that it will be possible 
to implement CWFS.

The CWFS core group will organise a series of virual meetings on this topic (see meetings) and will create documents (see documents). We will organise 
a first virtual synchronisation meeting at 16.11.2020 (and a reserve date at 20.11 for thos who cannot make it at the first). We are asking all interested
persons to submit interesting use cases (so no elaboration on technical frameworks).

Since there are a many experts in Germany interested in this topic, we set up a CWFS-DE group under the umbrella of RDA Gemrany (see CWFS-DE).

In case of questions contact Peter (peter.wittenburg@mpcdf.mpg.de).

